---
layout: post
title:  "Highly divisible triangular number"
subtitle: "Problem 12"
category: Project Euler
---
> The sequence of triangle numbers is generated by adding the natural numbers. So the 7th triangle number would be 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 + 6 + 7 = 28. The first ten terms would be:
>
> $$ 1, 3, 6, 10, 15, 21, 28, 36, 45, 55, \dots $$
>
> Let us list the factors of the first seven triangle numbers:
> 
> {:.list-unstyled}
> - **1**: 1
> - **3**: 1,3
> - **6**: 1,2,3,6
> - **10**: 1,2,5,10
> - **15**: 1,3,5,15
> - **21**: 1,3,7,21
> - **28**: 1,2,4,7,14,28
>
> We can see that 28 is the first triangle number to have over five divisors.
>
> What is the value of the first triangle number to have over five hundred divisors?

This one can be solved by generating and filtering. The generator for triangle numbers I wrote is:

{% highlight clojure %}
(defn triangle-numbers []
  (reductions + (iterate inc 1)))
{% endhighlight %}

Let's check that:

    (take 7 (triangle-numbers))
    => (1 3 6 10 15 21 28)

Now we need the divisors. Stolen from [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Divisor): 

> If the prime factorization of n is given by:
> 
> $$ n = p_1^{\nu_1} \, p_2^{\nu_2} \cdots p_k^{\nu_k} $$ 
>
> then the number of positive divisors of n is
>
> $$ d(n) = (\nu_1 + 1) (\nu_2 + 1) \cdots (\nu_k + 1) $$ 

So basically we find the prime factors of a given number, add one to all exponents, and multiply. 

Now I could have used the factorization function I wrote in [Problem 3]({% post_url 2016-03-14-largest-prime-factor %}),
but that one naively checked all integers, not just primes.
So let's combine that with the prime-generator from [Problem 10]({% post_url 2016-03-24-summation-of-primes %}).

{% highlight clojure %}
(defn prime? [n]
  (.isProbablePrime (BigInteger/valueOf n) 10))

(defn prime-seq []
  (filter prime? (range)))

(defn lowest-prime-divisor [x primes]
  (letfn [(divides? [x p] (zero? (mod x p)))]
    (->> (take-while (partial >= x) primes)
         (filter (partial divides? x))
         (first))))

(defn prime-factors [x primes]
  (lazy-seq
    (when-let [prime-factor (lowest-prime-divisor x primes)]
      (cons prime-factor (prime-factors (/ x prime-factor) primes)))))
{% endhighlight %}

This code will no longer check all integers, just primes.
Most of this code is the same with the addition of the `primes` parameter and subsequent uses.
Let's see it in action:

    (prime-factors 28 (prime-seq))
    => (2 2 7)
    
Now to use the formula mentioned above we need the exponents of the primes, but we found individual numbers.
To find these we can easily use the `frequencies` function to count the occurences of a factor.
For the total function we get:

{% highlight clojure %}
(defn number-of-divisors [x primes]
  (->> (prime-factors x primes)
       (frequencies)
       (vals)
       (map inc)
       (apply *)))
{% endhighlight %}

    (number-of-divisors 28 (prime-seq))
    => 6
    
Cool! Now we can get the answer by doing the following: 

{% highlight clojure %}
(let [primes (prime-seq)]
    (->> (triangle-numbers)
         (filter #(< 500 (number-of-divisors % primes)))
         (first)))
{% endhighlight %}

Solved in ± 1700ms on my machine. OK enough I guess.