---
layout: post
title:  10001st prime
subtitle: Problem 7
category: Project Euler
---
> By listing the first six prime numbers: 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, and 13, we can see that the 6th prime is 13.
>  
> What is the 10 001st prime number?

Clearly we need to write a prime generator. Once we have that we're basically done.
So I'll write an incremental sieve that checks all odd numbers.

First the prime check. Given a number $$ n $$ and a list of primes, it should check if none of them are fully divisible.
We only check primes not greater than $$ \sqrt{n} $$.

{% highlight clojure %}
(defn is-prime? [n primes]
  (let [trial-divisors (take-while (fn [p] (>= (Math/sqrt n) p)) primes)
        divisible? (fn [n divisor] (zero? (mod n divisor)))]
    (not-any? #(divisible? n %) trial-divisors)))
{% endhighlight %}

Now for the sieve itself:

{% highlight clojure %}
(defn prime-seq []
  (lazy-seq
    (let [primes (prime-seq)]
      (cons 2 (filter #(is-prime? % primes) (iterate #(+ 2 %) 3))))))
{% endhighlight %}

Nom-nom... co-recursion. Let me explain: `prime-seq` is a lazy function, so it will not evaluate until needed.
Inside prime-seq in the let-binding I will hold a reference to the head of this sequence.
Normally this will cause a stack-overflow because `prime-seq` will call `prime-seq` indefinitely.
But because we don't evaluate, `prime-seq` will not be called and no overflow occurs.

Inside `is-prime?`, our reference `primes` can safely be used because it will only check primes not bigger than 
$$ \sqrt{n} $$. Therefore it will never exceed the number of realized primes.

If it would, `is-primes` would start generating new primes by calling `prime-seq`, landing us again in a stack-overflow.

But we're safe. Now just:

{% highlight clojure %}
(nth (prime-seq) 10000)
{% endhighlight %}

And it's done!